## Introduction

For more than 2,600 years, the religion we know today as Buddhism has guided
many great civilizations, inspired refined cultural achievements and produced
a vast body of profound teachings. Some of the wisest people to have ever
walked the planet have been Buddhist monks and nuns. Today, large numbers of
men and women from diverse backgrounds throughout the world are following the
teachings of the Buddha. So what is Buddhism? Who was the Buddha, and what are
his teachings?

## The Buddha

The person who was to become the Buddha was born Siddhattha Gotama roughly 480
BCE as a prince of a small kingdom near what is now the Indian-Nepalese
border. Although he was raised immersed in the great luxury of his royal
status, and he excelled in the arts and education that prepared him for
leadership, outside the confines of the palace walls Siddhattha was deeply
moved by the suffering bound up with a normal human life. He saw that old age,
failing health or death inescapably touched the lives of every living being.
On one occasion he also saw a wandering renunciate, a person seeking a
solution to life's important questions, and this then motivated Siddhattha to
begin a spiritual quest.

At age 29 Siddhattha left the palace and his family behind for the remote
forests and mountains of Northeast India. Wandering as a homeless and
penniless religious seeker, he was determined to find out if there was a way
to experience a lasting security and peace that was free from life's inherent
difficulties. Overcoming the fear and hardship of living in the wild, he
adopted the pure and moral life of a monk. He trained under the wisest
meditation teachers and philosophers of his time, mastering what they had to
teach, but they still could not provide the answers he was seeking. He then
adopted the path of extreme asceticism---not allowing himself to feel pleasure
while fasting to the brink of death---but still to no avail.

By age 35, Siddhattha had realized that neither self-indulgence nor self-
torment would lead to true happiness. He then tried a different tact. Turning
away from these two extremes, he applied his mind to developing deep
concentration and freedom through wisdom. Sitting beneath the branches of what
is now known as the Bodhi Tree, he developed his mind in luminous and tranquil
states of meditation. With the extraordinary clarity and sharp penetrative
power that is generated by inner stillness, he focused his attention on
investigating the nature of existence, its cause and its cessation. Through
this refined contemplation of the essential characteristics of reality, he
attained the transcendent liberation of consciousness known as enlightenment,
*Nibbana* (or *Nirvana*). From that point on he was known as the Buddha, the
One who had Awakened.

The Buddha's enlightenment consisted of an all-encompassing insight into the
nature of the body, mind and phenomena. This awakening was not a revelation
from an outside power or deity, but a unique discovery that arose from within
based on the deepest levels of meditation. Insight had liberated his mind from
the roots of all suffering: selfish desire, anger and deluded perceptions of
reality. This experience eliminated all traces of inner dissatisfaction and
discontent, revealing unshakeable peace. He had found the ultimate solution to
life's problems that he had sought, and the result was unparalleled, sublime,
true happiness.

This enlightenment is considered to be the highest human potential possible,
far surpassing any heavenly existence. Having experienced it for himself, the
Buddha then spent the next 45 years teaching a way of life, a practical path
of training and development which, when accurately and diligently followed,
would lead others to the same awakening. These teachings are known as the
*Dhamma* (or *Dharma*), meaning 'the nature of all things' or 'the path to
understand the truths of existence'.

## A Path of Inquiry

There are no fixed beliefs that a person must adopt in order to be a
'Buddhist'. In fact, the Buddha warned against the dangers of blind faith and
encouraged wise inquiry and tolerance. The traveler on the path of inquiry
maintains an open mind and thoroughly investigates his or her own experience
of life. When one sees for oneself that a particular view or belief is both
reasonable and in accordance with one's experience, leading to happiness and
benefit both for oneself and others, only then should that view be adopted.
This standard applies to the Buddha's own teachings. They should be looked
into carefully and examined with the clarity generated by meditation. As
meditation deepens, direct insight into the nature of life grows. At this
point one is in a position to clearly decide what religious or spiritual
teachings are in accordance with reality.

## Meditation

Meditation refers to the mental activity of sustaining clear awareness on one
thing: a physical sensation, perception, concept, process or material object.
Buddhist meditation has the specific purpose of developing peace and insight.
For example, one could pay attention to the process of breathing, the emotion
of loving-kindness, the mental repetition of a meaningful word or the
perception of impermanence. Meditation can be done in any posture, but the
most common are sitting cross-legged and walking back and forth. As mindful
awareness becomes increasingly continuous, the dispersed and distracted energy
of the mind becomes more focused and clear. The act of sustaining awareness
calms and soothes both the body and the mind, while the focusing of attention
energizes and brightens the heart.

The deeper the meditation becomes, the more quiet, still and peaceful one
feels. This cleansed and purified awareness, developed through dedicated
training, yields extraordinary clarity of mind. One begins to see things as
they truly are, beyond the limitations of conditioned perceptions and habitual
thought patterns. As one sees clearly, wisdom is born, and thus serenity and
insight form an inseparable pair that is gradually cultivated until the
realization of full enlightenment.

## The Four Noble Truths

The central teaching of the Buddha, around which all his other teachings
revolve, is the Four Noble Truths, formulated as a medical analysis:

1. The diagnosis: Life inevitably involves some mental and physical pain.
Everyone at some point experiences disappointment, discomfort, anger, sadness,
anxiety or suffering. People don't always get what they want, and they are
often separated from whom and what they love. If we live long enough, we
experience the gradual physical degeneration of old age, and everyone
encounters death.  Even the subtle but pervasive stress that accompanies
normal daily functioning is a burden. 2. The cause: The root of mental pain is
craving for sensual pleasure, for existence or for non-existence; or simply
wishing that things were different than they are. Craving is fueled by
reactions to pleasure and pain and driven by the illusion of 'me' and 'mine',
which in turn arise from misunderstanding the true nature of reality. 3. The
recovery: It is possible for all mental suffering to completely cease. This is
the attainment of enlightenment or awakening. Enlightenment is the
purification of the heart from all traces of attraction, aversion or delusion.
It is the complete letting go of the illusion of an independent self or soul.
A fully awakened person is called an *Arahant*. The Buddha called this the
highest happiness, the full realization of human potential. 4. The treatment:
Enlightenment is achieved through a gradual training, a way of life called the
Middle Way, or the Noble Eightfold Path.

These Four Noble Truths are realistic in that they face up to life's
imperfections, and optimistic in that they offer a practical solution: a way
of life leading towards enlightenment and peace of mind. Because all things
are in a constant state of change, they are inherently unable to provide
lasting happiness or reliable satisfaction. Grasping and clinging to any
aspect of experience leads to friction, stress or disappointment when those
things, people or situations fade and disappear. As long as this pain is seen
as something unnatural or abnormal to be feared, avoided or rejected, it will
be impossible to uproot its causes and live a truly happy life. However, to
the degree that the subtle and all-pervasive nature of the first noble truth
is recognized, one can accept and be free from suffering. This is why the
reflection on suffering is emphasized as the key to ultimate liberation, and
those who have realized enlightenment are inspiring examples of profound
happiness, loving-kindness and compassion.

## The Middle Way

The path to awakening is called the Middle Way, because it avoids the two
extremes of self-indulgence and self-torment. Such extreme behavior does not
lead to peace. The Middle Way consists of cultivating virtue, serenity and
wisdom and is further elaborated as the Noble Eightfold Path:

1. The perfection of understanding: views that are in accord with the natural
truths of reality. 2. The perfection of intention: motivations of loving-
kindness, compassion and renunciation. 3. The perfection of speech: words that
are honest, harmonious, gentle and meaningful. 4. The perfection of behavior:
non-violence, not stealing and being sexually responsible. 5. The perfection
of work: earning a living or sustaining one's life in a way that does not harm
or exploit others or oneself. 6. The perfection of effort: cultivating and
maintaining wholesome states of mind while overcoming unwholesome states and
keeping them at bay. 7. The perfection of conscious awareness: being fully
mindful of one's body, feelings, mind and phenomena. 8. The perfection of
meditative concentration: deep unification, peace and purity of mind.

When all eight factors of this path are brought to maturity, one is able to
penetrate the true nature of existence with insight and experience the
perfected wisdom of the Buddha's teachings.

## The Law of Kamma

According to the natural law of *kamma* (or *karma*), one's intentions are
causes that lead to experiencing results in the future. The results will be
similar to the intentions, and depending on one's state of mind when acting,
speaking or even thinking, they will be experienced as either pleasant,
unpleasant or neutral. If one's intention is tainted by anger, selfish desire,
a wish to harm or general confusion, this creates the causes to experience
pain, unhappiness and misfortune in the future. This 'bad kamma' is
unbeneficial both for oneself and others. Similarly, if one's actions, speech
and thoughts originate from motivations such as generosity, unconditional love
or clear understanding, this creates the causes to experience pleasure,
happiness and good fortune in the future. This 'good kamma' leads to the well-
being of both oneself and others.

Most, although not all, of what one experiences is the result of one's
previous kamma, and how one responds to the present experience will generate
new kamma. In this dynamic interplay between experiencing results from the
past and responding in the present, we literally create our own future, moment
by moment. Kamma is not fate, and the present moment is where there is the
possibility of freedom. This is where one has the opportunity to free oneself
from the unbeneficial patterns of behavior based on one's past conditioning.
This opportunity for freedom, however, is only possible if we are mindful and
attentive. This is why clear awareness and understanding in the present are so
crucial to the path of liberation taught by the Buddha.

No being, human or divine, has the power to stop the consequences of good or
bad kamma. One reaps exactly what one sows. So when one finds oneself in an
unpleasant situation, rather than projecting blame, one can reflect wisely on
one's own past conduct and take responsibility for the causes that led to the
situation. Likewise when one is feeling happy, instead of taking it for
granted, one can examine the previous causes and conditions that brought it
about. Understanding how happiness arises encourages making further good
kamma. The only escape from the results of kamma is enlightenment. Until that
time, however, it is possible to mitigate the severity of the consequences of
bad kamma by increasing the good. The Buddha gave the simile of a spoon of
salt mixed in a glass of water compared with a spoon of salt mixed in a large
river. The glass of water becomes undrinkable, while the taste of the water in
the river is hardly affected. Similarly, the results of bad kamma for a person
only doing a small amount of good kamma is very painful, while the results of
the same bad kamma for a person habitually doing a great deal of good kamma is
much less severe.

The Buddha did not invent the law of kamma. It is a natural law that operates
whether people are aware of it or not. The Buddha, however, deeply understood
this process of interconnected causes, conditions and effects. He then taught
a way to live within it that leads to peace and happiness. Insight into kamma
naturally leads to living an ethical, compassionate and wise life. When an
entire society embraces these principles, the result is peace and prosperity.

## Rebirth

The concept of past and future lives is intrinsic to the Buddha's teachings.
At the same time, the Buddha did not encourage believing a doctrine merely out
of faith. With advanced abilities in meditation it becomes possible to
remember past lives, but until then rebirth remains a matter of reasoned
reflection. According to Buddhist teachings, when a person who is not fully
enlightened dies, although the physical body comes to an end, there is still a
mental momentum, a desire to exist, that then leads to rebirth. A fully
enlightened person, however, has purified his or her stream of consciousness
to the extent that no further existence is possible. Since even the most
pleasant of existences are considered far inferior to the great happiness,
freedom and peace of Nibbana, the goal of Buddhist practice is not to be
reborn.

Rebirth is not limited merely to humans. The Buddha taught that the realm of
human beings is but one among many, including heavens, hells, animals and
ghosts. One may be reborn into any of these, depending on the kamma one has
accumulated. The law of kamma can only be fully comprehended in the context of
multiple lifetimes, because it sometimes takes this long for the seeds of
kamma to bear their fruit. The repetitive cycle of birth and death, the
wandering on from realm to realm, is inherently unable to fully satisfy and
often produces pain. By following the Noble Eightfold Path to its culmination,
the process of rebirth ceases completely.

## Do Buddhists Believe in God?

Buddhism is a non-theistic religion that does not worship a God, creator or
savior. Progress on the path to enlightenment is not dependent on an external
force but on one's own effort. Buddhist cosmology does acknowledge the
existence of heavenly realms, and the divine beings living there are similar
to what people might associate with gods or God. However, because of the all-
encompassing law of impermanence, even these exalted beings are subject to
passing away and being reborn. They are still caught in the cycle of birth and
death, and therefore are not taken as an ultimate refuge.

## The Delusion of a Permanent Self or Soul

The Buddha taught that there is no essential or permanent core to a living
being that could be considered one's true self or soul. What appears to be an
individual person is actually a changing process of mental and physical
qualities combining temporarily in a particular way. Through possessive
attachment, the mind identifies with part or all of this process, and this
gives rise to the sense of self, 'me' and 'mine'. In fact, all phenomena,
whether animate or inanimate, arise dependent on causes and conditions. In a
constant state of flux, all things are empty of independent inherent
existence, and the entirety of reality is a continuous flow of interconnected,
causally conditioned events arising and passing away in the present moment.

The Buddha taught that it is precisely the deeply held deluded understanding
of a separate self that is the root cause of all human suffering. Although the
perception of self seeks happiness, its insatiable craving repeatedly produces
discontent. As long as one identifies with something as oneself, the
inevitable result is a lack of outer harmony and inner peace. Only through
insight based on profound meditation can this mirage be clearly seen for what
it truly is. Only then can one know perfect happiness.

## The Buddhist Monastic Order

The Buddhist monastic community, the *Sangha*, was created by the Buddha for
those people who wished to fully dedicate their lives toward the realization
of enlightenment. The monastic life enables one to leave behind the pressures
and entanglements of mainstream society to focus more whole-heartedly on the
goal of liberation. Adopting this simple and austere lifestyle directly
challenges many deeply held attachments. The Buddha gradually developed a
detailed and refined code of conduct and discipline to aid monastics in their
cultivation of virtue. This framework supports communal living and practicing
in solitude, both important for developing deep meditation and wisdom.
Monastic life is an example of a viable non-materialistic, alternative
lifestyle dedicated to generating goodness, wisdom and peace in society.

Between Buddhist monastics and Buddhist lay people, there is a relationship of
nourishing interdependence. The Sangha relies on the lay community for its
material needs, and in return the monks and nuns provide the lay community
with spiritual guidance, moral support, and an inspiring example. As long as
the Sangha continues to practice in accordance with the Buddhist monastic code
of discipline and strives for the attainment of enlightenment, the teachings
of awakening will continue to flourish.

## Types of Buddhism

By the time the Buddha passed away, his teachings were well established in
India. With hundreds of thousands of disciples, including the kings and
leaders of his day, and with tens of thousands of monks and nuns, Buddhism was
well on its way to becoming a major influence in the world. Buddhism continued
with great momentum in India after the Buddha passed away and spread
peacefully southward as far as Sri Lanka, northward to the Himalayas, westward
to what is now Pakistan and Afghanistan, and eastward to China and Indonesia.
As it spread and flourished in the new lands, different denominations, or
schools of thought, also developed. After 500 years a new sect called Mahayana
gradually emerged, distinguishing itself from the lineage currently known as
Theravada. In their new scriptures, the Mahayana schools depicted the Buddha
as divine or semi-divine, while the ideal of an Arahant was replaced with that
of a *Bodhisattva*, one who vows to become a Buddha in a future life.

The Theravada schools continued to look to the original teachings and
lifestyle of the Buddha as their inspiration, and they became established in
Sri Lanka, Myanmar (Burma), Thailand, Laos and Cambodia. Mahayana took root in
China and from there spread to Japan, Korea and Vietnam. A later school, known
as Vajrayana, then spread from India to Tibet, incorporating the local animist
religion to create Tibetan Buddhism. This then spread further to Mongolia and
Bhutan. The most well-known Tibetan monk and Nobel Peace Prize laureate is the
Dalai Lama.

### Buddhism in the World Today

Buddhism continues to gain an ever-widening audience in countries and
societies far beyond its original home. Many people throughout the world,
through their own careful choice, are adopting Buddhism's peaceful,
compassionate and responsible ways as guiding principles in their lives.
Meditation has always been at the very heart of the Buddhist path, and as its
proven benefits to both mental and physical well-being become more widely
known, these ancient methods of developing the mind and heart grow
increasingly popular. When stress is shown to be such a major cause of human
suffering in modern society, the quieting practice of meditation is even more
valued.

Our 21st century world is too small and vulnerable for us to live in isolation
or conflict, and in Buddhism's 2,600 year history there has never been a
'holy' war to spread the teachings of the Buddha. The qualities of tolerance,
non-violence and forgiveness, essential for world harmony and individual
happiness, have been hallmarks of Buddhism from the very start. Cultivating
virtuous behavior, meditation, and wisdom, the Buddha's path gradually fosters
the development of all-embracing acceptance within the heart. As we learn to
accept others with loving-kindness, so too can we accept ourselves.

The down-to-earth teachings and practices of the Buddha culminate in pure joy,
unshakeable serenity and penetrating wisdom. These qualities have been
identified with Buddhism for thousands of years and are needed more than ever
in today's world. The gentle and sagacious peace of enlightenment, growing out
of a reflective and practical way of life, is a human potential that every one
of us can aspire to. It is the greatest gift we can give to the world.
